Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Richard Lobst, and
today I'm here with a return guest, Dr. Jacob
Steenge. He's now a professor of philosophy at Nanyang
Technological University in Singapore, and today we're going to
talk about his latest book Heart of Science A
Philosophy of Scientific Inquiry. So Dr. Steengo, welcome back
to the show. It's always always a pleasure to
everyone.
Thanks Ricardo, thanks, and uh it's nice to be
here and I should say you can call me
Jacob.
Oh, OK, OK, I will try, I will try.
Uh, SO, I, I mean, I, I know this,
that this is a very broad question and some
philosophers of science actually spent almost their entire careers
just focusing on it and there's entire books written
about it, but uh I would like, I, I,
I think it's just a good. Question to start
on, so what is science and what is scientific
inquiry?
Yeah, OK, so thanks for that question. I mean,
as you note, it's a really broad question and
the subtitle of my book is a philosophy of
scientific inquiry. So it really would take a whole
book or a whole library to properly answer this
question. But, um, even if I give a short
answer, you know, it might raise further things for
us to talk about. Um, SO, so, you know,
science, science, of course, what science is trying to
do is to learn about the world. Uh, SCIENCE
is trying to discover facts about, about nature, facts
about the world. Um, SCIENCE as an activity involves
both, typically it's an easy way to Categorize scientific
work is into empirical work and theoretical work, so
a lot of science is about the gathering of
evidence, and then a big part of science is
about how to make sense of that evidence theoretically,
and those theoretical claims are supposed to be, you
know, claims about the world, claims that we can
come to understand about the world. So there's empirical
work, theoretical work in an attempt to learn about
the world.
And what is the aim of science, or if
not, what the aim is, what should it be?
Thanks, yeah, yeah. OK, so this is a long
standing question for philosophers of science. Philosophers of science
have offered many different answers to this question. Uh,
I take a chapter in the book to give
an account of what I take the aim of
science to be. Just as a preface to answering
this question though, when we're speaking about the aim
of science. We need to be clear that we're
speaking about what I, what I call the constitutive
aim of science. So what I mean is we're
not speaking about the kind of sum total of
all of the particular aims of the particular stakeholders
in science, like the aims of scientists, the aims
of science students, the aims of science funders. People
have different aims, right? Some scientists want to become
rich and famous. Some want to discover facts about
cancer and so on. So we don't mean the
particular aims of particular scientists, but rather, um, when
we speak about the aims of science, we're speaking
about the constitutive aim of science as an institution.
So think about like, The game of chess. The
game of chess has a constitutive aim that is
victory, and it doesn't really matter if like when
you play chess with your nephew, you're doing it
just to teach him how to play chess or
just to have fun or spend time with your
nephew. You have various aims, right? The constitutive aim
of chess is victory, um, regardless of the particular
aims of particular agents in that endeavor. So I
argue that the constitutive aim of science is, is
what I call common knowledge. So it's a special
kind of knowledge. So common knowledge is um a
justified true claim about the world, that's the knowledge
part in which there's both consensus about the claim,
broad consensus and consensus about the justifications that are
on offer for that claim. So it's not to
be confused with something like common sense, right? So
common sense is not what I'm after here. Common
knowledge is a, is a kind of technical notion,
uh, which involves, um, two components broad consensus about
a claim and broad consensus about the justification for
that claim. So, so that's the aim of the
constitutive aim of science, and I argue that. Science
at its best routinely achieves that aim.
Right. I, I mean, you mentioned, uh, three different
things there and we have to go through each
of them. You mentioned common knowledge, scientific consensus, and
justification, but, uh, uh, just before we get into
that, uh, I would like to ask you because
I've had conversations on the show. With, for example,
sociologists of science and philosophers of science, and this
is something that is brought up very frequently. What
do you make of when, for example, certain scientists
claim that The aim of science is to uncover
objective truth. I mean, is that really the aim
of science, or should it be, I mean, of
course it depends on what you mean by objective
truth, right? But since science. IS an institution, a
social institution like any other, which operates in a
particular socio-cultural context. And later, I guess when we
talk about whether science can be value-free at all,
if that's possible, we'll come back to some of
what we're going to discuss here. But is it
really something that scientists should aim at objective truth,
and is that even, uh, like possible taking into
account that science is a human endeavor and that,
as I said, it operates under a certain specific,
uh, under a specific social con uh cultural context.
Yeah, so it's a really good question and there's
a lot packed in there. So, you know, you
mentioned some sociologists of science and some philosophers of
science who have, at least historically, Often doubted that
science can attain a sort of special objective truth,
a sort of view from nowhere. Um, THERE'S a
lot of arguments that have been on offer for
that kind of view, that sort of skeptical view
about science. Now I think that those sorts of
views are often radically exaggerated, um, and in fact,
this, they are more and more falling out of
favor too. So, so the short, my short statement
here, my, my kind of programmatic statement is that
um, Science at its best can achieve objective truth,
and scientists ought to be aiming at that. Um,
SO there are very simple examples like, you know,
the structure of DNA as a double helix or
dinosaurs existed, um, you know, these are claims that
are objectively true. They, they'll be true for all
time. There's broad consensus about these claims to deny
these claims, to say like the structure of double
of DNA is a triple helix, say you'd have
to be, you know, just completely disconnected from um
actual science. So science, science achieves common knowledge, um,
I in the book I also call these timeless
truths. These are objective, objective claims about the world.
Now I think that um. There's a lot of
things though, there's a lot of nuance to add
to this though. What we see in science often
is a kind of overconfidence in. In among scientists
making particular claims to particular putative truths that turn
out not to be true, and so as we
know, you know, scientists are often quite, quite overconfident
in their putative claims to truth, and it's a
virtue among all people, including scientists, to be humble,
and so. Um, HUMILITY, of course, is a virtue.
Scientists should be humble, but I don't think that
they should be so humble such that they would,
they would hold that, you know, science can never
achieve truths. Science does achieve objective truths like DNA
is a double helix. Um, SO, OK, there's the
humility point, um, and of course there's another sort
of important argument that many sociologists and philosophers of
science make, which is that, um, We have this
long history of scientific theories being held up as
true and then later coming to be seen as
false. And so one, you know, one way this
is sometimes put sort of colorfully is that science
is a like a graveyard of dead theories. All
the theories in the past have been shown to
be false and therefore our theories today are very
likely to be false. That's a, that's a common
argument. Philosophers sometimes call this the pessimistic meta induction.
Now in the book I argue against this pessimistic
meta-induction. Um, THERE, there are, there are really compelling
reasons to not be too swayed by, by that
worry. Of course, again, it's good to be humble,
but I think it's also good to recognize real
scientific achievements when they exist and, and, and, and
we do have them. Science at its best has,
has really great achievements, um. Another angle to this
is in that in that overconfidence point. Um, I
think some areas of science at some periods in
history have been more successful at achieving the aim
of common knowledge than other areas of science at
other times. Um, SO for example, like physics of
the early 20th century was just wildly successful at
discovering like really important facts about, uh, about the
universe, about the structure of the atom, and so
on. Um, PHYSICS today. IS much more in a
sense theoretical and much less tethered to um Um
Novel empirical methods of testing contemporary theories, and so
in short, the theories are are departing more and
more from. The kind of evidence that we can
gather to test them and so in, in like
physics at its cutting edge should always be humble,
um, and so. Um, IT'S one thing to say,
yeah, science at its best can achieve common knowledge,
particularly like the science at its best, say, physics
of the early 20th century, but, but we should
also maintain a kind of humility in, um, in
thinking about science, especially science at its cutting edge,
um, and there's, there's, you know, lots and lots
of examples of this. Yeah.
So let's get into the particular concepts that you
mentioned in your previous answers and sort of, uh,
tackle them one at a time. So what is,
what do you mean by common knowledge and how
does it manifest in the domain of science?
OK, yeah, so, so abstractly what I mean by
common knowledge is, um, a true claim that is.
Um, VERY well justified by a relevant scientific community.
That scientific community has broad consensus about the claim
and broad consensus about the justification for that claim.
Um, SO that's, that's common knowledge. There's lots of
examples of this, like, you know, DNA is a
double helix, that's, um, that's a very simple one,
or, you know, the sun is at the center
of the solar system, it's another simple one, Now
That abstract definition raises some secondary questions like what's
the relevant community, what proportion of the relevant community
has to assent to the claim, what proportion of
the relevant community has to assent to the justifications
for that claim. Um, I work out some of
these nuances in the book, so I think the
relevant community is essentially the community of, of relevant
experts. So if it's a claim about The structure
of DNA, then it's, you know, biochemists, for example,
and genetic geneticists in that case as well.
Exactly, yeah, yeah. Now there will be like grays,
there will be particular individuals for whom there's a
kind of gray zone status about their, you know,
um, membership in this community of experts. So like
a biochemist who got half a PhD and then
dropped out, right? Well, Have a lot of expertise
or like say a physicist who happens to like
know a lot about biochemistry because he's, you know,
consulting on the use of particular instruments in this
biochemistry lab, so he learns a lot. So he's
an expert in one area, but he also learns
a lot about this this related area. So there
are gray zone cases, but you know, that's life.
So there's like a set of experts with some
gray zone cases and then we can imagine within
that set of experts sort of two. A two
dimensional. Um, TWO dimensional graph, for example, and one
of the dimensions is the proportion of members of
that community that assents to a claim. And the
other dimension is the proportion of members of the
community that assent to the justification or the various
justifications for that claim. We have common knowledge when
we have high values on those two dimensions. So
when we're sort of far in the corner of
this two dimensional graph, um, so that that's common
knowledge.
Yeah, no, that's really interesting because I mean, I've
been doing the show for 8 years now. I've
interviewed more than 1200 people and it's interesting that
over time, Uh, I've become more and more attuned
to, I mean, what, uh, what's the level of
expertise of each person when it comes to each
subject and the ones I should take more or
less seriously in terms of their claims, because, for
example, I can even Ask a paleoanthropologist about the
evolution of Homo erectus, for example, or the colonization
or the migration of humans to the Americas, but
I mean he or she might not be specialized
in that. A specific domain of paleoanthropology. Perhaps I
have to ask directly someone who actually works on
the migration of Homo sapiens in the Americas or
on the evolution of Homo erectus, uh, so that's
um. Higher level of resolution, I guess in terms
of specialization. It's not that the paleoanthropologist is not
enough of an expert on the topic perhaps, but
uh some people who actually work specifically on that
subject should be taken more seriously,
I
guess.
You know, that's a really interesting point. Yeah, um,
that's, by the way, congrats on your show. I,
I, I, I remember appearing on your show six
years ago to talk about my first book, Medical
nihilism. That was a great interview. Um, AND your
show has really developed since then. Uh, CONGRATS. Thank
you. Thank you. That, that, that, that feature that
you were just mentioning though, that's an interesting idea
that I, that I didn't think about in the
book, but this is worth, worth thinking through maybe
in future work, which is that. Perhaps the relevant
scientific community, um, in fact, or the relevant community
for assessing whether or not some claim is common
knowledge can expand over time when the claim, um,
becomes just better and better and better justified. So
for example, I would say that the relevant community
for assessing whether or not the sun is at
the center of the solar system is a really
broad community of basically educated. People generally, right, um,
where, whereas the relevant community to assess some cutting
edge feature of, yeah, you know, uh, archaeology, for
instance, would be a much narrower,
yeah, mhm, yeah, uh, but you mentioned consensus, so,
uh, how do we achieve consensus in science?
Right, so I mean, obviously what consensus is, is
essentially broad agreement among a relevant community about some
claim, um, how
we but but broad agreement, I mean, does it
have to correspond to a particular percentage of the
uh the relevant experts agreeing with a particular claim
or does the percentage not, Uh, not matter that
much.
Uh, I mean, I think it's going to be
really high, so I think, um, for realistic cases
of consensus, like the examples we've been using, dinosaurs
existed, for example, um, the relevant percentage is going
to be extremely, extremely high, um. But you know
if there's, if there's 2 or 3% dissenters on
a in a relevant, uh, for a relevant claim
in a relevant scientific community, that's, you know, high
enough anyways, 97% of members of the community assent,
that's really good. Um, IS it sufficient to count
as common knowledge? I mean, again, I think they're
like it's, it's a. The, the proportion of members
of a community that assent to a claim is
obviously a gradable property, right? Um, SAME with the
proportion of members of a community that, um, assent
to the justification for the claim. And so when
I, when we have that visual two dimensional graph
way of thinking about the, uh, definition of common
knowledge. It's, it's common knowledge is claims in the
top corner of that, of that graph, but because
these are gradable properties, there will be these gray
zone cases, 97% might be high enough, but maybe
94% won't, um. So these are line drawing problems
and line drawing. I'm not too interested in line
drawing problems, um, yeah, so then, but your question
was how do we get, um, consensus, yeah, and
you know there's a variety, variety of ways we,
we can get consensus. We can get consensus by,
um, genuine epistemic means. So what I mean here
is like genuine. Strategies for justification and this is
what I argue is like crucial for science. So,
um, scientists make a claim, they publicly articulate reasons
for that claim. They in so doing, they expose
those reasons to criticism, um, so they expose their
reasons to criticism, and that allows them to improve
upon those reasons, respond to the criticisms, and thereby
improve the quality of their, of their reasons for
that claim. And that, and that of course occurs
in a very kind of networked, you know, like
sciences, scientific communities are very networked, they're very social.
So multiple teams will be doing this, multiple teams
will be generating reasons and generating criticisms for the
reasons, and that, that generates a very like, you
know, robust kind of justification for scientific claims. There
are other ways we can get consensus, so we
can get consensus, for example, by propaganda or by
bullying, um, and those are of course epistemically inappropriate
ways to get consensus. If you, if we try
to get consensus by bullying or by propaganda, um,
we're doing so in a way that doesn't provide
genuine justification for the claims at stake. So the
kind of consensus that that science um needs and
routinely gets is consensus that's based on um genuine
modes of justification in this sort of public sphere.
Mhm.
Uh, AND, uh, another concept I would like to
clarify here is the one of justification. You also
use that term and it is a very important
aspect of your book and we're going to get
more into that. But what do you mean by
justification and why do you focus so much on
it in your book?
Yeah, thanks. So. Right, I'm arguing that the kind
of slogan of the book is, is that the
heart of science is justification. Um, SO justification is
this crucial notion in the book, um. We can
understand justification, however, in relatively non-technical ways. Justification in
science is essentially the provision of reasons for some
claim. So, um, you know, you've got, when you
make a prediction about what the weather is going
to be like in Portugal tomorrow, um, you're doing
it on the basis of some reasons. Some of
those reasons are better, some are worse, um, and
if those reasons are indeed, you know, uh, they're,
they're justificatory if they provide good grounds for your
prediction about the weather. Science, of course, like scientific
practice is, is just shot through with the provision
of putative justifications for various claims. So you provide
evidence for some, for some theory, uh, you provide
a logical argument or mathematical argument buttressed by some
empirical evidence, um, that gets you justification, um. So
we can think about justification as essentially like an
argument in the philosopher's sense, namely the provision of
reasons, empirical, mathematical, theoretical for some claim about the
way the world is.
Uh, AND, uh, in the book, uh, I would
like to ask you about this because it's a
very interesting, uh, claim. Uh, YOU, you claim that
scientific testimony should not be based on whether the
scientific work and the evaluation has achieved its aim,
but rather on justifying scientific claims. Could, could you
explain that?
Yes, good, yeah. So actually there's a um so
what you just said is is right about one
of the chapters, but that general principle is something
that I'm applying to um many different ideas in
science. So the general idea is, um, although I
argue that the constitutive aim of science is common
knowledge, I go on further to argue that for
any evaluative. Principle about science, the, the principle itself
should not be based on whether or not some
scientific work achieves the aim, but rather it should
be based on the quality of justification for the
claims being made. So in other words, Good science
in whatever kind of goodness we're assessing, good science
should justify its claims, but it doesn't have to
attain its aims. That's the slogan. Um, SO if
we're speaking about good scientific testimony, for example, like
some scientist makes some claim about the world to
a scientific journal or to a policymaker or in
a public relations campaign, in a, you know, a
press conference or writes an article for The New
York Times, whenever a scientist is making a claim
about the world. Our evaluation of that claim should
just always be based on the extent to which
that claim is justified. Now there are more nuances
than this, but that that's, that's the core idea.
So It should not be based on whether or
not the claim is true, and there's a bunch
of reasons for this, but the main idea is
that, you know, truth in science is determined typically
retrospectively, so it took, for example, many decades for
us to finally come to accept the Copernican theory
of the solar system. So truth is decided retrospectively,
but we want modes of assessing science for science
in real time. So our principles for assessing good
science, good scientific testimony, um, bad science is this
pseudoscience. We want to be able to assess. Real-time
science, um, and real-time science is accessible. According to
the extent to which that science is justified, that
scientific work is justified, rather than whether or not
it's true.
Mhm. And of course, we are talking about epistemology
here, but would you also, in this, in this
case when it comes to the aim of science,
because, uh, I mean, we live in a particular,
uh, economic system, in a particular sociopolitical system that,
uh, I mean, for, for example, most of the
time for scientists to be able to properly conduct
their work, they have to have. Access to particular
funds and they have to justify why the research
they're going to conduct is necessary and many times
that is justified in economic terms because it will
eventually produce certain economic gains and so on. I
mean when it comes to scientific, uh, the production
of scientific knowledge. And focusing exclusively on epistemology, uh,
that is, that shouldn't even be relevant, right? Whether,
uh, a partic whether a particular piece of knowledge
has some, uh, economic or produces economic benefits or
not, right? I mean that that's not particularly uh
relevant here.
Yeah, good. So that's, this is a really important
question. And my own view is that the answer
to your question is yes, right. It's, it's, it's,
it's not relevant when we're speaking about the constitutive
aim of science. Yeah. Now, of course, it's true
that um science often leads to. Um, MATERIAL benefits,
practical benefits, technologies, um, that, that's of course true,
and of course that those benefits can be a
reason to do science, um, that's of course true,
uh, and insofar as, you know, taxpayers are supporting,
uh, publicly funded scientists, then taxpayers can expect that
the kind of science that they're supporting will at
least sometimes have in the long run. Practical payoffs
for the society that's um funding that scientific work.
So, so that's all true, um. But when we're
speaking about, you know, science as, as an institution
as such, um. We can conceive of the constitutive
aim of science in these purely epistemic terms rather
than practical terms, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, but no, I just wanted to ask
you that because, you know, nowadays because of the
economic system we live in, uh, sometimes and because
particularly, I mean this is more of a personal
thing, but I just love knowledge for knowledge's sake.
I mean, for me it's many times it's a
bit frustrating how people want to or try to.
Reduce all scientific knowledge or all the relevance of
science and even philosophy to whether it produces some
form of economic value or not, and I, I,
I think that's not the way we should approach
epistemology and the production of knowledge, whether it is
scientific or philosophical or any other sort of knowledge,
so.
Yeah, I think that's exactly right. So, um, you
know, what one of our well-known colleagues in philosophy
of science, a very, a very eminent colleague, uh,
Philip Kitcher has this argument that, um, science should
be, uh, aiming to discover what he calls significant
truths, and for him significance has, Two basic basic
properties or you get significance through um sort of
22 possibilities. One is if the scientific work can
have practical payoffs, but the other is if it
can sort of satisfy a sort of basic intellectual
curiosity. Um, NOW there are various constraints on that.
So for example, you could imagine a scientist who
has this sort of like perverse goal of counting
the number of grains of sand on a particular
beach, right? So he's just curious about that. It's
clearly not going to have any payoff for anybody,
um, but that that particular scientist is, is just
curious about that. Um, PRESUMABLY we'd want to say
that, um, That curiosity is misdirected. It's certainly not
worth supporting through any, you know, government funded research
dollars. Um, SO, so there's got to be constraints
on the kinds of curiosity that, that are sufficient
to really motivate a scientific project and the support
of that scientific project. Typically some candidate constraints are
basically like broad. Theoretical knowledge that unifies or or
or makes more coherent our our broad set of
scientific claims about the world, so you know it
doesn't really matter how many grains of sand there
are on this particular beach, knowing that it's not
going to help us sort of figure out anything
else about the world, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, I, I, I mean, but, uh, that,
that's perhaps, uh, that, that example of counting the
grains of sand in a beach. I mean, that's,
uh, uh, uh, an, an exaggerated example because I
mean, I don't think that. Anyone would, would, would
really be, uh, genuinely interested in that. I mean,
I, I was just trying to make the point
that many times even when it comes to very
abstract things like, for example, the theoretical foundations of
a particular scientific field. I mean, sometimes that's a,
a really necessary work, but the economic Payoff is
not obvious at all, and I, I mean it's
still work that needs to be done if we
are to conduct ourselves in a proper scientific way,
I guess.
That's absolutely right, yeah, and you know, we are
curious kinds of creatures, right? We want to understand
ourselves, not because that's going to make us richer
or or live longer, right, but we're just genuinely
curious. Agents that want to understand where we've come
from, uh, what's out there in the world, what's
out there in the, in the, you know, the
stars above, um, how to be a good person,
where do we get meaning in life, you know,
there's all these like really deep questions that people
are genuinely curious about, um, regardless of any kind
of practical payoffs, yeah, yeah.
Uh, SO, uh, in the book and going back
to what we were talking about in terms of,
uh, justification and, uh, what, uh, and the aims
of science and all of that, uh, in the
book you suggested deontic rather than a consequentialist evaluation
of science. So what do you mean by that
exactly?
Yeah, yeah, thanks. So these are, these are philosophical
terms of art, deontic and consequentialist. And these terms,
I'm, I'm using to get at that idea that
we, that we were getting at a few minutes
ago, um, that is. Evaluation of science in any
kind of mode of evaluation should be focused on
the extent to which Scientific work satisfies various justificatory
principles rather than the extent to which science achieves
its aim. So, so that's the general idea. Yeah.
So I, I take that distinction between deontic or
deontological. Sometimes, sometimes you hear that term and consequentialist.
Those are terms of art from ethics. So a
deontic ethics is an ethics that's focused on, um.
Proper right behavior that follows principles rather and whereas
consequentialist ethics focuses on, um, you know, um. You,
you, it, it basically is the idea that the,
the right act in any decision is the act
that you know maximizes good consequences, even if maximizing
good consequences violates certain principles. So that's the distinction
and I just apply that distinction to judging science.
Yeah, but, but in this case, you, it's in
epistemological terms, right, you're using theontic and consequentialist. Uh,
WITHIN the domain of epistemology and so it's not
a moral or ethical evaluation of science,
right, right,
yeah, uh, and what do you make of factive
approaches to science? I mean, first of all, what
is effective approach and then, uh, what do you
make of it?
OK, right, so this question is getting into some.
Is a a pretty fine grained. Uh, ISSUE for
epistemologists, um, so. Factive approaches to epistemology broadly say
that um our evaluative stance for some domain should
be based on. Whether or not Some agent in
that domain is getting at the truth or speaking
the truth. Um, THAT'S what factive means. So a
factive claim about testimony, like a factive view about
testimony, says that appropriate, like testimony is appropriate only
if the testimony is true. Um, SO that's what
the term factive means. For epistemologists, yeah, and now
are you asking me to, so I mean I
can go on here, so I, um,
yeah, because the other part of my question was
what do you make of effective approach to science,
right, yeah, exactly, OK, so. For any feature of
science that we would be thinking about from a
philosophical point of view, like for example, scientific progress,
what is scientific progress or appropriate scientific testimony, when
is scientific testimony appropriate, when is it inappropriate, um.
We can take a factive approach to those questions,
so a factive. POSITION on scientific progress would say
science makes progress when it accumulates facts, when it
accumulates true claims about the world, so that's a
fact of Theory about scientific progress or a factive
theory about scientific assertion says or testimony, scientific testimony
is appropriate only if that testimony asserts facts, asserts
truths. So those are factive views about science and
they're very popular among epistemologists. And philosophers of science.
So the most, the, the most common theories of
scientific progress among philosophers are factive, and the most
common theories about testimony among epistemologists are factive. Now,
I spent a chapter in the book arguing against
these um epistemologies. I, I, I spent a chapter
arguing that factive approaches to scientific evaluation. ARE inappropriate.
Um, WE should have, we should be non. Factivists,
we should have non-factive, um, evaluative. Norms or principles,
um, what do I mean by nonfactive? I mean,
Evaluative principles that are based on the extent to
which scientific work is justified rather than um the
extent to which that science gets at the at
the truth, that's that's the general idea.
And you mentioned scientific testimony. Which features do you
think good scientific testimony should have then?
OK, yeah, OK, thanks. So, I think Assertion in
general and especially scientific assertion or scientific testimony. There
are 2 good making features. Of scientific testimony, and
I think in testimony in general. One is that
the testimony be justified, uh, so if somebody tells
you that, um, the weather in Lisbon tomorrow is
going to be sunny, you want that claim to
be justified, right? They're making a claim about the
way the world is. You want them to have
good reasons for that claim, you don't want them
to just be making it up, lying, or making
it, or maybe they had. Uh, SOME weather report
from a notoriously unreliable weather forecaster, right? You want
them to have good reasons, reliable reasons for what
they're saying. That's like the good making feature number
1. Good making feature number 2 is that the,
Information that's being asserted be truly informative. Now notice
that. Um, The degree of justification of a claim
and the degree of informativeness of a claim can
trade off against each other because We can artificially
make. Testimony more justified by making it vaguer and
vaguer and basically hedging our claims. So for example,
if you ask your friend what the weather is
going to be like in Lisbon tomorrow and they
say, um, they could say something like, it's either
going to be rainy or it's not going to
be rainy. I mean that's like logically true, right,
so it's like maximally justified, but it's not informative,
it's not going to help you decide whether or
not you should carry the umbrella, right? Or if
they say to you, it's going to be greater
than 0 °C, right, that's really well justified as
a prediction about what the weather in Lisbon's going
to be like in April. But it's not informative
at all, right? Because it doesn't tell you like
should you carry a sweater or an umbrella or
something like that. Um, SO there, there are these
two properties, justification and informativeness about assertion in general
and scientific assertion in particular. They can trade off
against each other, and what we want is scientific
testimony that tries to maximize both. And I, I
give An argument in the book that justification has
some degree of priority over informativeness. So if we
have to give up one, we can give up
informativeness, but we Always want our scientific testimony to
be um well justified. Mhm.
So I would like to ask you a little
bit about the demarcation problem. This is uh something
that in the philosophy of science, a topic in
the philosophy of science that I've explored on the
shows in several different uh interviews, but, uh, what
do you make of it? I mean, how should
we address the problem of Trying to demarcate science
from pseudoscience or and or anti-science because sometimes people
also, uh, distinguish between pseudoscience and anti-science. I mean,
what, how do you approach that problem?
OK, good. Um, THIS is a great question, and
it's a very rich question. So, um, The demarcation
problem has been a canonical problem, a canonical topic
for philosophers of science. So, you know, introductions to
philosophy of science courses in universities always will teach
the demarcation problem. Uh, IT was a very important
question for philosophers of science in the early decades
of the 20th century through the mid-decades and later,
um. So we always teach it to students. There
are a few kind of big heroes in that
topic. Uh, Karl Popper is one of the common
names that comes up. Popper, um, in a sense,
put the demarcation problem on the map, so to
speak, and he had his own view, a theory
of demarcation that's sometimes called falsificationism. His view is
that good scientific work should be falsifiable, that is,
When a scientist makes a claim about the world,
that claim, there's got to be a possible way
in which we can discover that that claim is
false, um. And It does look like that is
a desirable property of theories. Now what happened after
Popper is that Philosophers made it their business of
criticizing Popper's view, and it was fashionable for, for
many decades to point out problems with Popper's view.
It's interesting because Popper's view, this falsificationism view, um,
got a lot of traction with scientists. So many
scientists think that Popper was right, uh, falsificationism is
right. You'll hear scient in your interviews with scientists,
you probably get this all the time.
No, no, I mean that's, that's totally true. I
mean, I, I many times I hear scientists or
even science communicators just think is is just assuming
that false. Falsificationism is true and is the correct
criterion and even the only criterion to have in
science because they're not even aware of the discussions
among philosophers of science.
So yeah, yeah, that's right. And Popper, I mean,
Popper's view was appealing. Um, THERE are, there are
good, good things about it. You know, to give
one kind of, uh, just to give the viewers
of your show a little bit of like sense
of, of how this debate has gone. Um You
know, one of Popper's concerns was that when people
don't try to falsify their work, when they go
around trying to just like find evidence that supports
their views rather than find evidence that falsifies their
views. We can be led to a kind of
confirmation bias. We can be cherry picking evidence that
just supports our views, sort of ignore evidence that
doesn't support our views. That looks really unscientific, right?
So the, the, the, the opposite behavior looks sort
of rigorous, right? So rather than try to confirm
our views, we should be trying to disconfirm our
views, um, and then, you know, the, the theories
that survive that rigorous attempt, um, are the ones
that we should at least, Entertained for a while
for a while longer until we in fact falsify
them. That was, that was what was appealing one
of the things that was appealing to to Popper's
view now. There are some in the history of
science, there are some very successful scientists who didn't
behave that way. So for example, one of my
heroes is Marie Curie, and you know, in her
diary, she speaks about, um, she had an idea.
And she was so excited about the idea that
she wanted to work extremely hard in her laboratory
to confirm her idea, and that motivated her to
really just, you know, put in many hours in
the lab to devise really careful instrumentation to generate
a lot of evidence that then confirmed her view.
And so it's, you know, she wasn't behaving in
a in a pauperian way, but she discovered really
important facts about radiation and she won the Nobel
Prize for this. So there are these like compelling
historical cases that look like well they weren't, they
weren't behaving as as Popper said they should. There's
also sort of changes in. The kinds of things
that we that broadly construed. We'd have to worry
about when we're when we were worried about the
demarcation problem. So I, I, I find the following
kind of framing of the demarcation problem quite, quite,
um, interesting. When Popper was writing. He was, he
was formulating his demarcation problem, his his demarcation question
and his solution in the 1920s and 1930s, and
his big targets were, for example, Marxism. So he,
he noted that
Marxism and I think that he also targeted psychoanalysis,
Freudian psychoanalysis, I
think exactly, yeah, so he targeted Freudian psychoanalysis. Freudian
psychoanalysis at the time was very um. Important, you
know, many people were like, like viewing themselves as
Freudians and seeing Freudian therapists, but of course Marxism
was much more important, right? Marx Marxism was like
this really important political theory that was clearly revolutionizing
major parts of the world, um, and Popper was
deeply worried about that. Popper was worried about dogmatism,
about political dogmatism. He noted that Marx claimed that
Marx's view was scientific and Marx, you know, generated
like offered some putative evidence for the scientific status
of his view, and Popper took his demarcation problem
and argued that no, according to, he took his
demarcation solution, namely falsificationism, and argued no, uh, Marxism,
Marxist theory of history and politics is not scientific.
So there it was, it's interesting because what was
Popper responding to, what was, what was really motivating
him, a worry about political dogmatism. And I don't
know. I mean, at the time there was some
sloppy science. There was, you know, phrenology, so on,
but there was also really amazing science too, like
the particle physics of the early 20th century or
a lot of medicine of the early 20th century,
biology of the early 20th century, chemistry of the
late 19th century, geology of the 19th century. These
were just like massive breakthroughs in all these major
areas of science that were really, really impressive. Darwinian
evolutionary theory of, you know, mid-nineteenth century. Popper was
impressed by a lot of his work. Popper was
impressed by Einstein, and he wasn't, you know, he
wasn't using his principle of demarcation to do this
like fine-grained assessment of particular areas of genuine scientific
work like this bit of chemistry over here is
good science, this bit of chemistry over here isn't.
That's not what he was doing. He was saying
Marx's theory of politics and history is pseudo-scientific, uh,
Einsteinian relativity theory is scientific, right? So it's much
more coarse-grained and targeted against what he viewed as
dogmatism. Today. Of course we live with dogmatism, right,
so dogmatism is still a major threat to us,
but but something that has changed in science too
though, right? Science itself has become. Um, THIS massive
thing, uh, highly varied in its qualities, um, it,
it's, you know, various forms of like social psychology
and medicine is facing these replication crises. There are
all these incentive structures in science that kind of
corrupt science in various ways, and so. What we
need now is not. This coarse-grained demarcation problem that
puts like, you know, Marxism over here and physics
over here, but rather we need an approach to
demarcation which is a bit more fine-grained and sensitive
to like particular differences within sciences. And that was
what motivated my approach to demarcation in this book.
Mhm.
Uh, BUT I, but I mean nowadays, and I
know that there are different perspectives among, uh, or
across, uh, uh, philosophers of science, but nowadays, uh,
are there, uh, I mean, falsificationism specifically, is it
still taken very seriously by Philosophers of science, or
do they, I mean, at least have some caveats
to it, or do they think that other, um,
other theories are better suited to address the demarcation
problem? I mean, how, what is the current state
of affairs when it comes to it?
Yeah, you know, it's funny because, um, after the
decades of criticizing Popper, a lot of philosophers of
science basically just gave up on the demarcation problem,
and I, I think that that's a real, that's,
that's giving up a lot because in my view,
the demarcation problem is one of the big problems
for philosophers of science, right, especially when we live
in society like today, like we need to be
able to say something about the various qualities of
scientific work. Um,
I mean, I mean, not least because nowadays even.
People use a lot the term pseudoscience to refer
to, for example, certain, um, medical or pseudo medical
practices and things like that. So I mean, I
guess that it is important to have a, uh,
I, I mean, I, I guess not necessarily a
universally accepted definition, but at least a definition of
what pseudoscience is.
Yeah, that's exactly right, yeah. So, so, OK, so
in short, Popper fell out of favor and Uh,
sometimes some people will write things like, well, there,
you know, he had a lot going for his
view, but, um, so there's something right about his
view, but that that's the sort of, you know,
discourse. Um, IN some sense, I'm trying to resuscitate
Popper. Um, WHAT I, what I, what I argue
is that, OK, first, it's, it's worth noting just
what was wrong with Popper's view. So one is
that it was, Based on a single dimension, right,
so we want to judge all of science and
then we take this one property of scientific theories.
Asking a single question, which is binary in nature,
is this theory falsifiable or not, right? And also
it's factive, it's about in a sense it's about
the theory, right, rather than about the scientific work
that promotes the theory or supports the theory. So
it's sort of outcome oriented in that sense. So
it's outcome oriented, it's a binary evaluation based on
a single property. So if we get rid of
those features of our approach to demarcation, we can
keep falsifiability as an important feature for science. So
it's what is one good making feature of scientific
work, falsifiability, but there are others. So we can
take a kind of multidimensional approach to scientific judgment.
The other properties can be gradable properties, right? So
for example, like how much evidence do you have?
If you did a randomized control trial, do you
have 1000 subjects or 100 subjects? So right, so,
so scientific evaluation can be gradable based on multiple
properties. Those properties themselves can be gradable, like how
many subjects you have in a trial, um. And
it can be process oriented rather than product oriented.
So, uh, it can be about the scientific work,
the experimental work that goes into offering some degree
of justification for scientific claims. So that's my approach
to demarcation, basically, it's to say, um, rather than
a single property, rely on multiple properties rather than
a binary evaluation, use a gradable evaluation, then, um,
asking is this bit of work pseudo-scientific or not.
Is a bit of a misnomer, um, because what
what we're doing is really just asking like, is,
does the work satisfy various justificatory principles and practices,
one of which may be falsifiability, but there may
be others, right, um, and if it scores low
on our evaluation, then we could use the term
pseudo-scientific or or we could just say it's bad
science or whatever, um. Yeah, so that, that's my
approach to, to the, the famous demarcation problem.
No, yeah, uh, I, I was just, um, it,
it was coming to mind, um, a, a discussion,
uh, it was not a discussion, it was more
of a, a Q&A, I, if I remember correctly,
that, uh, Richard Dawkins and Neil deGrasse Tyson participated
in, uh, The last decade, I, I, I'm, I
can't remember the year exactly, but at a certain
point, someone in the audience was asking Richard Dawkins
why, uh, science is true or why we should
trust science, and he said, oh, because it works.
And I mean, uh, yeah, that, that's fine, but
that's an inductionist claim. I mean, it's because, because
it works, that it's true. I mean, but, but,
uh, I guess that scientists at least should be
a little bit more aware of the philosophy of
science or the philosophical foundations of what they're doing
because I don't think that's just saying, saying, oh,
science is true because it works. I mean because
planes fly or something like that. I mean I
don't think that's making justice to even their own
work because it's much more complicated than that.
That's exactly right. Yeah, so I mean, one of
the sections of that chapter on the demarcation question
in my book gets exactly at this question about
why should we trust science, um, and, Yeah, I,
I totally agree with you that because it works
is a bad answer. I think also the question
itself is, is in a sense. Um, MISFRAMED because,
so the question is, why should we trust science
and. I, you know, going back to something we
said earlier, science is a broad church, right? There's
many different, like scientific disciplines, and within a scientific
discipline, there's better experimental work, worse experiment experimental work,
and so on. Science that it's cutting edge is
like making these bold predictions, established science is sort
of safe. Um, SO I don't think that we
should trust science in that broad sense, right? It's
not like there's this one thing, science, that we
should either trust or not trust. Rather, I think
we should take this finer grained evaluative attitude. Um,
AND so then the question is like, what are
the conditions under which some particular bit of scientific
work is trustworthy, and what are the conditions under
which it's not, right? So should we trust science?
Well, I mean, I trust the results of particle
physics from 1920. I think there's overwhelming reasons to
think that a large majority of what has been
passed down to us from physics at that time
is true. It's, it's and it's common knowledge. These
are timeless truths, or like, do I trust that
the DNA is a double helix? Of course, right?
Or like measurements of the charge of the electron.
Have been stable at like 20 decimal places of
a coolom for 100 years, right, so that's something
that's and with you know measured in a bunch
of different ways by a bunch of different teams
decade after decade after decade, the sophistication of the
equipment has gotten more and more and more. So
anyways. There are some aspects of science that we
should clearly trust, right? But you know, I wrote
a book called Medical nihilism, and a big part
of that book was like we shouldn't trust, um,
the results of recent pharmaceutical science, at least in
some areas of medicine like psychiatry, right? So or
like a lot of social psychology of the last
generation has been facing this replication crisis. So if
some social, social psychologist goes on a TED Talk
and says, I just discovered why, you know, blah
blah blah, should we trust it? Well, you know.
Probably not, not at least not right away, right?
Yeah, you probably shouldn't trust the research done on
power poses and stuff like that,
yeah.
Yeah, but, but I mean, when we're talking about
whether people should trust science or not, I, I
mean, I, I, I guess that what I want
to ask you is, what about laypeople, because I,
I mean, when it comes to, for example, you
and me, I mean, uh, you specifically as a
philosopher of science, you've put thousands and thousands and
thousands of hours probably into. Studying these, uh, topics
and, uh, me personally, I mean, I've also done
thousands of hours of podcasts and thousands of hours
of reading different kinds of materials and there are
certain specific topics where I can properly, I think,
evaluate, uh, the evidence by myself after learning all
of what I've learned from the conversation. With other
people and reading all their work and so on,
but what when it comes to lay people, because
I mean we have to be fair here and
the fair thing to say I guess is that
the vast, vast, vast majority of people don't have
the time or resources to do the same thing
as we do. So I mean, to what extent.
Should they trust the science or is it that
they shouldn't trust the science, but they should deal
with science in some other way that doesn't involve
trust necessarily trusting it?
OK, yeah, it is a hard question when we
speak about what should lay attitude towards science be
and. I mean, one hope is that, you know,
science education and also philosophy of science helps people.
Um, THINK in a more careful way about when
to trust science, like the conditions under which we
should trust science, and so ideally, um, Everyone would
be studying a bit of philosophy of science. Ideally,
everyone would go buy my book and that, that
would, that would, you know, give people a slight
more sophisticated, um, uh, set of tools to think
about what are the conditions under which they should
trust science. What are the conditions under which policymakers.
SHOULD formulate broad social policy on the basis of
scientific testimony, you know, we all, the last time
that you and I spoke was at the height
of COVID lockdowns. Um, I was locked down in
eastern Ukraine actually. I, I remember our video, um.
And that lockdown was a result of policymakers formulating
policy on the basis of scientific assertion, on the
basis of scientific testimony. Now, with the benefit of
hindsight, we have learned that a lot of the
policies that were formulated at, at the time were
probably misguided and the scientific testimony was, you know,
often overexaggerated, um, like predictions about the harms of
COVID, the modeling work, um, so, so asking this
question. What are the conditions under which we should
trust science is really, really important for policymakers and
for the lay public, right, the lay public, Your
average person is routinely faced with questions like, should
you take this pill or not, um. And you
know, should you get vaccinated?
Yeah, I guess that some of it also has
to do with how science is communicated, particularly in
more mainstream non-scientific media or media that is not
specialized in science communication, because I mean, it's very
common for you if you go to the comments
section of a particular news piece. I, I mean
people. Complain and with good reason that oh so
yesterday they were saying that you should drink coffee.
Today they're saying you shouldn't drink coffee. I mean,
and it's with good reason because they get really
conflicting information on on just mainstream media.
Exactly, yeah, so I've I've got like a great
example of that that I'm going to come to
you in just a minute, but let me firstly
kind of get to your question, which is How
should your your average non-expert um figure out when
to trust science or not? So you've got the
coffee example, like one day that they say it's
safe, the other day they say it's harmful for
our health, right? Um, SO one of my colleagues,
Peter Vickers, I, I, I engaged with his work
in one of the last chapters of the book,
he argues that there's a few very basic. Signs
that a non-expert can point to. One is consensus.
So if there's broad consensus in a scientific discipline,
that's pretty good evidence that the claim about which
there's evidence is a claim that we can trust.
So that's one kind of bit of a sort
of sign. Another sign that Vickers points to is
the extent to which there's broad diversity in that
consensus. So if the consensus arises because like this
small community of like-minded people just agrees about the
claim, then that's not much of a sign that
the claim is true or should be trusted, right,
because that community could be essentially just involved in
some kind of fancy form of groupthink, right? But
rather if the consensus arises, so, so that's, that's
Vickers that's two simple signs consensus. And The diversity
of the community. Now in my book I fill,
fill that thought out a bit more. So, um,
I argue that, you know, if those social features
of scientific communities are all working well, like the
reasons for the claims are being publicly articulated, the
putative reasons are being criticized by other members of
the community, the reasons are being improved upon, the
methods are getting better, the evidence is getting better.
This iterates over time and the claim withstands all
these tests over time. After a certain point, we
really ought to start just trusting the claim in
question. Um, SO there's a kind of withstand the
test of time via this. Critical social approach um
to, so another famous philosopher here who argues something
like this is Helen Longino, she has a kind
of social theory about scientific objectivity. I draw on
this theory a lot in my book. So basically
like you've got this social structure involved in this
giving and taking of reasons, public criticism of reasons,
improving upon reasons over time. If that's all in
place. And some claim Gets passed down to us
after decades of this, we should trust that claim.
So all the best examples in science are like
this, like the, the core of the atom is
this dense nucleus, right? We've known that for 100
years, uh, the charge of the electrons, the sun
is at the center of the solar system, dinosaurs
existed, right? So all of those claims are claims
that we should trust because they have those features.
Now what about, um, for example, and this is,
we might get to this example later, but A
claim by an epidemiologist um in say March of
2020 that the COVID-19 pandemic is going to cause
such and such a number of deaths, um. By
June, unless we lock down, there's a claim that,
you know, it's based on rapid work that hasn't
gone through that public scrutiny, it hasn't gone through
years and years of iteration of public scrutiny of
reasons, um, oftentimes that work wasn't even peer reviewed
or published, um, so it's a different kind of
scientific claim, right? Um, SHOULD we trust it? Ah.
Maybe, but it just doesn't look anything like the
claim that say the structure of DNA is a
double helix. Um, ANOTHER thing that you, you pointed
to in, in your, in your last comment was
about, um, The importance of Articulating norms for appropriate
scientific communication when scientists are in this public facing
mode, say, writing an editorial for The New York
Times was a great example of, of, of this
that I draw on in the book. Um, THE
example is basically a breakdown of, of norms for
appropriate communication in my view. So, you know, I
argued that earlier we were saying that I, I
argue that there's two good making features of scientific
communication, the communication be justified and it be informative.
Now, there was this huge experiment done during COVID.
It's called the Bangladesh mask Study. So this was
done in 2021. If you know, if we kind
of jog our memory, we'll, we'll remember that everybody
wanted to know, do masks work, right, do masks
slow the spread of COVID. This is a huge
debate. Some evidence suggested that that masks do help,
some suggested that they don't. Experts weren't agreeing with
each other. Um, SOME experts, experts were publishing meta-analyses
saying no masks are basically useless, but then those
experts got criticized by other experts. There's a lot
of confusion. So this big study was done, the
Bangladesh mask Study. 600 villages in Bangladesh, some were
randomly allocated to a mask intervention. They got free
masks, training on how to, how to wear the
masks, and some had a control intervention. 350,000 people
in these villages were in the experiment. It's a
huge, huge experiment. No. Um, They finished the experiment,
they got their data, they analyzed it. They published
an article in the journal Science, the world's most
important journal, and at the same time, they published
an editorial in The New York Times. The headline
of the editorial was, we did the research, masks
work. That was the headline. OK. Now that's unambiguous,
right? That's, here are these experts. We just published
this article in Science. We did the research masks
work, so it's totally unambiguous. That's super clear, right?
But, but here, here's the, here's the catch. When
they published the science article. They didn't actually include
the number of cases of COVID in the mask
villages and the non-mask villages. What they reported was
the relative risk reduction, which I've argued in technical
work in, in my, in my past. This measure,
the relative risk reduction is extremely misleading. Um, SOME
statisticians asked the scientists who did the study for
the raw data for like the number of subjects
that had COVID in the mask villages and the
number of subjects that got COVID in the non-mask
villages. So they shared the data, and it turned
out that um the subjects in the, in the
mask villages had something like, 1,085 cases of COVID.
I, I, I think I've got that number wrong
just by like a few, but it's that it's
right around there. 1,085, um, cases of COVID. And
in the non-mask villages there were 20 more cases.
And this experiment lasted 6 months, so it's 6
months of masking. So you take 350,000 people, half
of them get masks. You will force them to
wear masks for 6 months. And then you get
a reduction in Of number of cases of COVID
by 20 out of 350,000 people, right? When you,
when this is measured with what's called the absolute
risk reduction, which is a more appropriate way to,
to measure an intervention like this. It's basically like
0.0006% reduction in COVID. Yeah, yeah,
it's, it's, I mean, statistically insignificant, right? It's,
it's, it actually was statistically significant. Um, IT was
a completely tiny signal. It was statistically significant because
the numbers were so huge, but it was just
a totally tiny. It was clinically insignificant, right? It
was practically socially insignificant. But the scientists wrote that
editorial in in the New York Times. We did
the research, masks work, right? So. Using my principles,
they just totally violated this principle of of justification,
right, they made a claim that was just unjustified
according to the evidence that they themselves had, right,
um, yeah.
Uh, BUT I, I mean, since we're already talking
about the COVID-19 pandemic, I, I wanted to ask
you, and I, uh, and I mean, I, it's,
I think it's very important here when posing this
question to distinguish between Um, moral justifications and epistemic
justifications, but, uh, uh, I mean, even from a
moral, uh, I mean, I don't know if you
want to include here the moral justifications or not.
If you want, please, please tell us so, but
do you think that because of the public health
threat that COVID-19 posed, that kind of, uh, quote
unquote past science was justified back then?
Yeah, OK, good. Yeah, thanks, thanks for this question.
So, you're appealing to this term fast science, which,
um, which, you know, I coined a few years
ago. I first coined this in a blog post
when. I was, you know, reflecting on the scientific
work that was going on in real time as
we were living through the COVID pandemic, so by
fat science I meant. You know, loosely, the rapid
epidemiological work um that um was giving us predictions
about what was going to happen um to healthcare
systems, to the, you know, number of deaths under
different policy scenarios. Um, SO this was the modeling
work that was being done by really prominent groups
like for example, the, the Imperial College London Modeling
Group, um, and, So that started in a blog
post, then I wrote an article and I also
included a chapter in my book on this notion,
fast science. Now. The question is Is that fast
science justified and As you rightly note, there's a
kind of epistemic angle and a moral angle to
it, to that, to that question. So Right, so
what I do is I give a slightly more
careful characterization first of what fast science is. So
fast science is policy facing science. Which violates some
principles of justification, um, so whatever standard principle, like,
for example, if you like popper's falsifiability principle, fast
science would violate that because it's quickly responding to
a threat, um, so it's policy facing and it's,
um, in response to a threat, and the, the
threat has got to be, um. Like a it's
gotta be imminent, so, uh, it's gotta be, there's
gotta be a, the threat's gotta be threatening us.
Very soon, and the threat's got to be of
a very large magnitude in those scenarios when we
have an imminent large threat. Then It does make
sense to cut some corners to respond to that
threat. So it might make sense to, for example,
do some scientific work to figure out the nature
of the threat and responses to the threat, but
maybe don't publish it in a peer reviewed journal
because peer review can take a long time, and
maybe the peer reviewers, you know, reject the article,
so you've got to submit it to another journal,
right? And so that would look sort of absurd
if we're truly facing an imminent threat. Um, SO,
so I think that in, in general, the answer
to your question is yes, fast science can be
justified, um, justified on these kind of practical, social,
moral grounds. So even if it, even if it's
the case that we're violating some epistemic properties of
science, like we're violating some justificatory practices of science,
that can be OK if we're responding to, you
know, if we're dealing with facing this imminent threat
of great magnitude. So in general, I argue that
yes, fast science can be OK, but not anything
goes, right? So, so just because we've, we've said
fast science can be appropriate in the context of
a threat. Um, AND what fast science involves involves
cutting corners. It doesn't mean that we can cut
all the corners, right? Um, SO it doesn't mean
that it's like we can just start consulting crystal
balls, right, um, or, you know, fortune tellers, um,
yeah, so that's what I argue in the chapter
of this chapter of the book is that. Any
science that's done, which is properly fast science responding
to a threat has still got to satisfy various
principles of constraint, um, it's got to kind of
have the same look and feel of routine science,
um, even if it's done quickly and even if
some corners are cut.
Oh, OK, but just to clarify this point, because
since our interview is mostly on, uh, from the
point of view of epistemology, is, is it justified,
it's justified morally, but do you think it's also
justified epistemically or not?
OK, right, yeah, no, this is a good question.
So I mean we could, yeah, so certainly fast
science can be justified on moral grounds, um, so
yeah, we've got to respond to a threat. Um,
AND so we're going to say not submit this
paper to peer review, or maybe we're doing an
experiment. Uh, SAY we're testing, uh, a new vaccine,
the safety of a new vaccine, and, you know,
this happened, right? So we're testing the safety of
COVID vaccines, but as we know, the harms of
some vaccines can appear. Um, YEARS later, right, it
doesn't necessarily going to appear. That's true for any
medical intervention, right? Um, SO any medical intervention has
a risk of harm that appears, um, years later,
but we didn't have years to wait during the
COVID pandemic, so, um, we needed vaccines quickly, and
so we ran experimental trials of these vaccines, testing
the benefits and harms of, of these vaccines. We
did them quickly, so we had short-term follow-up and
then we approved the widespread use of these vaccines.
Based on the short term experiment, was that justified?
Yeah, I think probably yes. um, I think it
saved a lot of lives, um, and so, um,
yeah, I don't want to say probably yes, it's
definitely justified, um, so it's justified on practical grounds,
um, does, but of course, there's still a lot
that we can learn about the vaccines and so
we can keep studying them in the longer term.
And so we, our methods can get better and
better and better, we can get more and more
justified claims about the benefits and harms of the
vaccines over time. Um, YEAH.
Mhm. OK, so I have, uh, 3 or 4
more topics I would like to touch on before
we wrap up the interview. Um, I, I, this
is one that I've already alluded to earlier, but
do you think it's possible to have value-free science?
And I, and I mean, I, I, I, I
want to be careful here what I mean, what
I mean by value-free. IS not because nowadays people
discuss a lot. Oh, there are, I mean, individual
people have certain political biases, certain moral biases. Some
people are liberal, some people are conservative, and so
on and so forth, and that can have an
impact in the way they Um, I, I, I
mean they design their studies in the way they
arrive at their conclusions in their studies and so
on, but that, that's, that's not necessarily what I'm
talking about. What I, what I'm asking you is
whether science as an institution can be value-free. I
mean, in terms of uh in constitutive terms, whether
it's possible for it to be value-free or not.
Yeah, yeah, good, yeah. OK, so I, um. I'm
going to answer the question. I'll, I'll just add
to your, um, the way you've framed the question
a little bit. So, so in general, the question
is, can science be value free, um, and there's
this very interesting debate among philosophers of science that
are debating that question. What's not being debated are
questions like, Um, is the scientific research agenda value
free? Of course it's not, right? So we decide
to study this topic rather than that topic, and
that's a value laden decision. So scientists, you can
get research funding to cure cancer or. Build more
explosive bombs or whatever,
yeah, yeah, as we said earlier, they're all, there
are all sorts of political and economic motivations that
go into that, so
exactly, so that's one way in which values obviously
influence science, or another way is like ethical constraints
on what scientists can actually do, right? So there's
like certain kinds of experiments we just can't do
to people or to animals or to the environment
or whatever. So those are valulaating constraints on science,
that's obvious, or like certain technologies that we develop
on the basis of science, um. So those are
also value laden, right? We decide to develop this
technology, we decide to constrain this technology. Those are
value laden influences on the application of scientific results,
but none of that's controversial in any kind of
deep, interesting philosophical sense. The really deep, interesting question
is, Should those kinds of values like social, ethical,
political values influence scientific reasoning itself, right? So scientific
reasoning itself, the kind of old school view about
scientific reasoning itself, it's pure from value influence, it's
just, it's value free, it's objective in this sense,
right? It doesn't depend on whether or not I
like this political candidate or I, I like chocolate
ice cream, you like vanilla ice cream, no, it,
it's just, it's about the objective facts, right?
So that's Yeah, yeah, let, let me just say
that that was exactly what I was trying to
ask, but you put it in better or more
rigorous terms, so yeah,
that's what I'm paid to do. Yeah, um, but
no, yeah, yeah, your question is, is exactly on
point. So, um, Somehow in the last generation, among
many of my colleagues in philosophy of science, they
have come to reject what's called the value-free ideal.
So the value free ideal is that old school
traditional view that says science is objective, it's scientific
reasoning is objective, scientific reasoning is free from value
influence, that's the value-free ideal, and it's become almost
status quo in philosophy of science to reject the
value-free ideal and. I think that that is all
wrong. So with a, with a very close friend
of mine, Tro Mennon, we have been publishing a
series of articles that um try to resuscitate a
particular version of the value free ideal. We articulate
a new version of the value free ideal that
we think are immune to the existing criticisms, so
we're sort of saving the value free ideal. Some
of that work with Troun then fed into. Uh,
ONE of the central chapters of this book. So
in the, in the book, in one chapter, I'm
saying, Science at its best, scientific reasoning at its
best. Can be value free And I think that
many of the examples of common knowledge that we
we've been speaking about today. Illustrate this perfectly. So
like there's no value influence in the claim that
The structure of DNA is a double helix. Um,
THERE'S no value influencing the claim that You know,
the Earth is at the center of the solar,
I'm sorry, the sun is at the center of
the solar system, um, so, you know, there's a
like established contributions to common knowledge. They're value free.
The reasoning that goes into them is value free.
Um, SO yeah, Tyro and I have been working
for years. Um, ACTUALLY we started writing these articles
also during lockdown. We would just zoom for, for
hours in the way that you and I are
zooming now and come up with, come up with
ideas and ways to try to salvage the value-free
ideal, and now we've got a series of 44
articles and, and, and this chapter in the book
in which we're trying to say science can be
value free.
OK, so, uh, I, I also wanted to ask
you about scientific progress. I mean, uh, and of
course here we have to get into one of
the most prominent and famous approaches to scientific progress
that come, that came from Thomas Kuhn, but, uh,
I, I mean, What, I, I, I guess I
have two different kinds of questions here. So, or,
or three even. What, so first of all, what
is scientific progress and how do you think we
should approach it?
OK, yeah, yeah, so you mentioned Kon and uh
you, you're noting that scientific progress is, yeah, a
core topic for philosophy of science. Um, WE do
want to know like what is scientific progress. Like
science appears to be progressing somehow, right? It's getting
better and better at doing something. Um, WHAT is
it getting better and better at? What actually, how
should we understand scientific progress? Um, MOST accounts of
scientific progress are factive, to go back to that
term we used earlier, right? They're based on. Uh,
BASICALLY a view that science makes progress when it
accumulates more truths, more knowledge, more facts about the
world. Um, SOMETIMES some people have an understanding-based view
of scientific progress. They say science makes progress when
it, uh, when our scientific understanding improves, but by
understanding they typically have a factive notion of understanding.
So most accounts of scientific progress are factive, um.
And One possible definition of scientific progress could be
based on my account of common knowledge. So if
I say that the constitutive end of science is
common knowledge, then one could just build in an
account of progress that says, well, we get scientific
progress when we get an accumulation of common knowledge.
Um, THAT would also be a factive account, that
would be a factive approach to, to, to scientific
progress. Um, I. I'm not deeply opposed to an
account like that, I guess I think my, I
might be OK with an account like that. What
I try to do in the book is argue
for an account of scientific progress that is not
product oriented, but rather is process oriented, which is
focused on justification. Rather than The accumulation of truths
or knowledge, common knowledge or whatever. So what I,
what I argue is that. Justification is like epistemically
accessible to us in real time, so we can
judge and scientists can know if they're making progress
in real time because they can judge the extent
to which some some scientific work is truly justificatory
or not, um, but they can't in real time
know if their claims are true because again it
takes. Usually truth is ascertained in science retrospectively, right?
Like there's got to be this decades of iteration,
public criticism of reasons and so on. So it
can take years or decades, like, you know, Watson
and Crick first published their paper in Nature articulating
the structure of DNA that was in 1953, but
it was only like 10 years later that they
won the Nobel Prize. You know, there's examples like
this, it takes time for scientific communities to really
establish that they've got common knowledge, um, but we
want to be able to judge progress in real
time. So like I think about, for example, a
mountaineer who's climbing a mountain. That mountaineer. Wants to
know if they're. On the right path if they're,
if they're, you know, approaching the summit, they want
to know that their effort's not wasted, you know,
um, and so, Being able to determine that there.
Um, ON their way up the mountain rather than
getting lost is really important for them, and I
think the same is true for science. So I
think that scientists should be able to judge progress
in real time and a justification centered account of
progress is accessible in real time. Um, SO that's
the, that's the kind of argument that I give
in that chapter.
And what do you make of, uh, I mean,
I'm just asking you about him because of course
he's very prominent when it comes to this question
specifically, but what do you make of Thomas Kuhn's
suggestion that, uh, I mean, basically science goes through
revolutions and paradigms change and all of that. So
I mean, what do you make of his suggestions?
I'm really glad you're asking this question because um
In addition to Popper, Kon has perhaps had. You
know, the most influence or, or a large amount
of influence on both scientific thinking about science and
about public perceptions of science, public views about how,
so, right, there's this revolution-based view that's, um, thanks
to Thomas Kuhn, so the idea is like science
can, can work within a paradigm for a while,
decades or centuries, and then. There will be all
these anomalies that crop up after like the equipments
get better, more experiments are done, more evidence is
gathered. There's this accumulation of novelties that the existing
paradigm can't accommodate, and then that will just lead
to this kind of breakdown, this revolution, scientists like
completely rethink um foundations of their domain from bottom
up. They articulate new theories, that's, and then that
generates a revolution. The old theories are chucked out,
so there's lots of examples of this like the
rejection of Newtonian physics, um, um, by, you know,
Einsteinian physics, for example, there's lots of examples like
this. That was Kuhn's view about science, um. I
suppose so. I basically think that he exaggerated. I
think he, he, he was exaggerating about the frequency
of revolutions, about how widespread revolutions are, and I
also think that, um, For certain domains of science,
for certain kinds of claims, they're revolution free basically
because, because key theoretical claims in some domains are
common knowledge, they're contributions to timeless truths. So like
there will be, there will never be a revolution,
a scientific revolution about the structure of DNA, for
example, not the macrostructure of DNA. Like the macrostructure
of DNA is a double helix and that's a
timeless truth. It's never going to undergo a revolution
in this. So, you know, Koon's focus was on
like. Abstract physical theories, um. You know, the switch
from Newtonian physics to special relativity, for example, it
could be that for physics at its cutting edge.
These are, this is a domain, either physics about
the tiny world, you know, the smallest components of
of matter, or physics at the largest scale, like
the structure of the universe on the far side
of the universe. So it could be that we're
like the structure of the universe a nanosecond after
the Big Bang, right? So it could be that
for certain kinds of questions at cutting edge physics,
astrophysics and particle physics. That those claims at the
cutting edge are just always going to be risky,
epistemically risky in the sense that they're making bold
claims about Like spatiotemporal features of the world that
are really removed from us, so there's a kind
of evidence theory disconnect, so to speak. Philosophers sometimes
use the word underdetermination. The theories are massively underdetermined
by the available evidence. So it could be that
for those domains, Kuhn was right, that we'll go
through revolutions. Um, THAT, that's, I'm, I'm willing to
go with Kuhn on that. But for spatiotemporal scales
that are much more accessible to us, even like,
you know, the structure of the DNA or the
structure of the atom. Uh, OR, you know, the
existence of dinosaurs, um, middle sized, so to speak,
like middle sized relative to the absolute smallest scales
and biggest scales, um, for those kinds of domains,
we can generate robust. Knowledge, common knowledge, our, our
common knowledge about these domains are timeless truths. They're
not going to go through revolutions. Um, SO I
think Kohn was exaggerating about the how, um, widespread
this notion, uh, how widespread this notion applies. Um,
THIS is really worth saying, and you know, I,
I lay all lay all this out in the
book because we think about, you know, to, to
kind of repeat. The two biggest influences on thinking
about science at this meta level are Popper and
Koon, and when we take the two together, we've
been discussing their ideas quite a, quite a bit,
when we take the two together. It's tempting to
conclude that Science can never really attain truths that
will really withstand the test of time in the
long run. There'll always be revolutions, you know, Popper
wanted to say that we don't even have like
confirmed theories, right? We can only sort of tentatively
entertain theories. So, as you, as you know, you
know, Konn had this radical view that we're always
going to chuck out theories, always go through revolution.
So, That's the view that we might inherit if
we take them too seriously, and I think that
that view is wrong, um, and that view can
generate this like deep distrust of science, right? Like
why should we trust science if it's just a
graveyard of dead theories, if it's just going to
go through one revolution after another, right? Um, WHY
would you even get on an airplane if, you
know, our understanding of aerodynamics is just going to
be completely overturned next, next decade or century or
whatever, right? So, Science is not just a graveyard
of dead theories. In fact, quite the opposite. Science
at its best has these achievements, what I call
common knowledge, or timeless truths that are always going
to be with us. They're just permanent achievements. And
so I really think that Kuhn, although Kuhn might
have been right about something and Popper might have
been right about something. Um, WHAT I'm trying to
do in the book, in at least a chapter
or two of the book, is to really push
back against their exaggerations and offer a kind of
a more realistic view about science, but a science
that also like a view about science that acknowledges
the achievements where they are.
Mhm. Yeah, and I mean, I don't know if
you will agree with me on this point, but,
and I'm not sure whether it's it's something that
could influence directly or not, or if it's, or
if it comes from other uh erroneous ideas that
are very common about that people have about how
science works or should work or is expected to
work, but I, I mean, I think that even
many scientists themselves, uh. HAVE this common idea that
they look at science. I mean this happens. I
see it happening more with older scientists or the
ones who are even already retired, where, for example,
they look back in evolution, I mean, I'm just
going to give an example in evolutionary biology they
look back and they say, oh, in the 1960s,
1970s there were all these great Development, sexual selection,
kin selection, and all of that, and now it's,
uh, I look at the present moment, the past
few decades, and it's basically stagnated. But I mean,
it's not really, because if you talk with people
that are doing the work right now, you have
more knowledge in terms of how, for example, speciation
works and you have many great developments in terms
of developmental biology. Developmental bias, for example, and how
it might influence the evolution of species and you
have things that some people like to associate, others
don't don't really like to do it with the
extended evolutionary synthesis. I mean work on niche construction
and all of that kind of thing, but I
mean, of course, those that work is not as
sensational as all sexual. Selection, natural selection, kin selection,
the, the theory of evolution itself. I mean, I
guess, yeah, it's, it's not as exciting. I mean,
but that's just to be expected because I mean,
most science actually, to be perfectly honest, is kind
of boring. I mean, it's interesting but boring at
the same time. I mean it's, it's a bit
weird, but, and, and also, I mean, I guess
that. Some of those people, like I don't know,
even going all the way back to Darwin, I
mean they were in a sense in a privileged
position because they were in a context where those
major theories weren't developed yet and so they had
the Opportunity to do so and I mean now
people cannot go back in time and recreate the
theory of evolution by natural selection. I mean, it's
already there. It's not going to happen again. So
I mean, but I guess that. Even some scientists
themselves have these or get these erroneous ideas that
oh if we don't have this sort of bombastic
findings occurring all the time, that science is not
progressing at all and I, I mean, I don't
look at it that way at all. I mean,
do you agree with that?
Yeah, yeah, definitely, yeah, yeah, yeah. I mean, of
course, it's wonderful that, um, you know, we, we've
got, you know, Darwin, Darwin, Darwinian evolutionary theory was
this massively important thing, and I totally agree with
you that um it's not going to be overturned.
It's not like there's going to be a revolution
about Darwinian evolutionary biology. Um, BUT there will be
lots of more fine-grained things that we can, um,
come to understand about, about evolution, um, and so,
uh, I, yeah, taking a finer grained approach, that's
part of the spirit of the book, right, is
we should be taking whenever we're thinking about scientific
evaluation, the goods of science, scientific demarcation, progress in
science, our approach should be sort of fine grained,
right? We should be like kind of zooming in
a bit.
Mhm. Yeah, so, I mean, I have two more
topics I would like to ask you about. So,
uh, I, I think at least this one is
important also to explore here. So in the book
you also talk about, uh, the allocation of credit
in science. So, I mean, uh, tell us what,
uh, credit allocation is, uh, particularly in the case
of science, and, uh, what do, uh, what do
you think are the rules it should follow?
Yeah, good. OK, so, you know, credit, credit in
science comes in many forms. Um, SO it can
be, uh, you know, it can be a prize.
These are famous examples of credit, credits like the,
the Nobel Prize. There's a bunch of different kinds
of prizes. It can come in more mundane forms
like getting a good job, getting a promotion, getting
tenure, uh, getting a job in a fancy university,
um. It can get, it can come in sort
of softer forms like um having lots of interested
graduate students, right, uh, graduate students want to come
work with you because you've done some interesting scientific
work. um, SO yeah, credit comes in, in different
kinds of forms. I mean, other, you know, other
familiar examples are like. The naming of things, um,
this was, uh, you know, a famous example of
credit, right? So the naming of particles, the naming
of, um, you know, various astronomical things like Halley's
comet, right, um, so naming of entities, naming of
discovered species, for example, that's a way of kind
of honoring, um, scientists on conferring credit on them.
So there's all sorts of ways in which credit
is conferred in science. Credit comes in many different
forms. Now, there's this very famous theory called the
the priority rule. Um, THERE'S a sociologist of science,
Merton. Who argued that the priority rules is the
way that credit is allocated in science. The priority
rule says winner takes all. The first person to
discover something gets all the credit for for that
discovery. And philosopher, philosophers of science have picked up
on this idea and have run with it. They've
said, yeah, Merton was right. The priority rule is
how credit is allocated, and here are the various
goods that come out of that priority rule. So
it incentivizes the search for novelty. It motivates scientists
to work really hard because, if it's only winner
takes all, you've got to be the winner, right?
So philosophers have adopted that as a premise. The
priority rules in fact how the credit is allocated
in science and then argue that this has normative
implications like these good features about science that come
out of the priority rule. I think that that's
all wrong basically. So I spent a chapter arguing
that this whole way of thinking about credit allocation
in science is misguided. Um, SO what I argue
that it's descriptively false, it's false that credit is
allocated according to the priority rule, and I also
argue that it's. That's, it's a good thing that
credit is not allocated according to the priority rule
because there are better ways to allocate credit um
that have, that are more appropriate. Um, SO I
give a descriptive, it's a descriptive thesis and a
normative thesis in this chapter. Um, SO the descriptive
thesis is I get, get it off the ground
just by various appealing to various examples. Um, SO,
so like one example that I like is the
discovery of radiation. Um, SO I think there's a
detailed historical example. It's really, really fun to read
about this example. I give, I give it a,
you know, maybe 2 or 3 pages in the
book, but basically there was this, there's a scientist,
Becare working in, in France. Who Sort of haphazardly
discovered the phenomenon of radiation. So he was the
first to actually generate. Existence, generate evidence for the
existence of radiation. But he didn't do the hard
work to understand radiation, to make sense of it,
to generate like really careful evidence pertaining to radiation.
Marie Curie did this. So Marie Curie Curie, um,
working in with, with her husband, um, um, carefully.
Generated really systematic evidence using novel experimental apparatus, uh,
over, you know, months and years. And that was
her PhD project. She ended up winning the Nobel
Prize for this. Um, SO she was in a
sense the second comer. Um, SHE wasn't the first
comer, right? Becare was the first, but Marie Curie
did all the hard work and um, she was
rightly allocated credit for for all that hard work.
So there's a case in which the second comer
is given credit. And rightly so, right? So it's
a descriptive thesis and a normative thesis. Like it's
a good thing that we have, we gave credit
to Marie Curie. Um, SO that's the, that's the
kind of argument I give in that chapter. Um,
ANOTHER sort of feature about the priority rule is
that if you allocate credit according to priority rule,
there's another feature. It's factive, right? So you're allocating
credit according to the first person to discover a
true claim, right, um. But actually What the, you
know, what we're rewarding Marie Curie for was the
quality of the work that she did. So it's
again, it's process oriented rather than product oriented. So
that's, that's another kind of slogan that I use.
So that's another feature about the priority role. It's
factive, but credit allocation is not and ought not
be factive oriented. It should be process oriented. And
then finally, If you give credit according to the
priority rule, credit allocation, credit is like non-partable, so
it's non-sharable in this sense. If it's winner takes
all, then there's effectively only one winner. Now, of
course, it's trivial that scientific groups, scientific teams can
have more than one person on it, right? So
you can share a credit in that sense, like
when. The Nobel Prize was awarded for the discovery
of the structure of DNA. Watson got it and
Crick got it, right, and a third person too.
So there's credit was shared in that sense, um.
In the sense that there's multiple people on a
team like generating evidence and theorizing about that evidence,
but In fact, credit can be shared in a
broader sense too, right? So it's not like we
just forget completely that a second person was involved
in, like in a completely separate independent team involved
in generating evidence or theorizing about some novel claim.
So credit is in fact shareable, and I give
other examples of this um uh in, in the
book. Um, SO yeah, the example I give, it's
a really fun example, it's the discovery of nuclear
nuclear fission. And this was like one of the
most important discoveries of the 20th century, right? I
mean, it led to the development of the atomic
bomb, right? So it had this huge impact on,
on our society and on World War II and
so on. But when we ask like who discovered
fission, it's almost a senseless question. Because, you know,
there's one scientist, Fermi, who was developing some really
strange evidence in his lab that he couldn't make
sense of. He published a paper in which he
thought that he was generating elements that were like
heavier than uranium, which he wasn't. He won the
Nobel Prize for that. So, you know, he did
interesting work that like helped contribute to the discovery
of fission, but he got like his theorizing about
it was all wrong, um. Then there were these
chemists and physicists who were trying to theoretically understand
what Fermi had been generating in his lab. Um,
Ida Nodak, uh, a character who appears in my
book, um, was, um, such a person. She, she
in fact got it right, so she was like
basically the sort of progenitor of the, of the
theory of fission. Um, THERE were other, others involved
as well in generating more evidence for the existence
of fission, improving upon Ferrami's methods. Um, WHO discovered
fission? It's sort of a senseless question. There were
these independent teams that were kind of, you know,
this one was generating some evidence. This one was
doing some theorizing. This one over here was trying
to fuse the two. Credit is shareable, right, um,
and it ought to be shareable, and it very
often is, um, shared. Yeah, so that's, so I
really in that chapter, I go after the priority
rule, um, and I think that's, it's, it's important
to do so. Again, it's about like celebrating the
best of science, um, in appropriate ways, like, um,
in ways that makes sense.
OK, so one last, uh, topic that I would
like to explore. You've already, uh, talked about, or
a little bit about timeless truths in science. You
gave the examples of, for example, the structure of
DNA, the structure of the atom. I mean, I
guess we could also talk about, for example, the
particle physics in general, the theory of evolution by
natural selection, I mean, uh, things like that. But,
but do you think that Uh, those examples like
those are. The rule in science, or are they
the exception? I mean, do you think that they
are representative of most of the knowledge that is
generated in science, or that perhaps most of the
knowledge is always up for being I, I mean,
even more than debated being replaced by better knowledge
in the future. I mean, the, the, and um
most scientific knowledge is not actually or does not
correspond to timeless truths.
OK, yeah, yeah. So again, I might go back
to this kind of distinction between science at its
cutting edge and, you know, science that's gone through
these years of iterations of articulated criticism and improvement
upon the, you know, reasons offered for various claims.
So I think probably science at its cutting edge,
especially science again to go back to this idea
of underdetermined theories, right? So science that's, you know,
about the very smallest aspects of nature or the
very biggest, most distant aspects of nature, both in
space and time. Scientific claims in those domains are
at the cutting edge, are extremely unlikely to be
timeless truths. The vast majority of scientific claims in
those domains are not timeless truths, um, but in
more accessible spatiotemporal scales, like all the examples that
we've been using, um, the structure of DNA, dinosaurs,
things like that, um. Those are timeless truths, and,
and sometimes these timeless truths are in fact really,
really like about. ARCANE, sophisticated like aspects of nature.
So like I use the example of the measurement
of the charge of the electron, right? So imagine
we can measure the charge of the electron to
20 decimal places of a coom. This is. Astonishing,
right, and we've been able to do that for
100 years, right? So it's, it's a, it's, it's.
So if we The charge of the electron has
been steady. The estimates of the charge of the
electron have been steady at 20 decimal places of
a coolom for 100 years. So at 16 decimal
places of a coolom, that's just definitely a timeless
truth, right? That's absolutely. And so science is filled
with examples like this. So if we, if we
kind of step away from the radically underdetermined domains
of science and step away from The cutting edge
of science. The The claims that have withstood withstood
the decades of iteration of articulated reasons and criticism
for those reasons in this like social context. Many
of those are timeless truths. Um, THOSE are the,
those are the claims that often can get into
textbooks, for example. Um, SO yeah, there, there are
timeless truths, and this goes back to something we
spoke earlier about. For some reason, colleagues in sociology
of science and philosophy of science and history of
science for many years have been really nervous about
this idea of timeless truths. They've often denied that
there can be timeless truths. Um, AND I think
that we should get over that nervousness. Um, I
think it's a kind of legacy. It's in part
a legacy of those big guys, Popper and Coon,
and we should get past that very misleading legacy
for many of the reasons that we've been speaking
about. And again, like, celebrate the achievements of science
at its best while maintaining the view that we
should also be cautious about science when it's not
at its best, like. Like science during the COVID
pandemic, for example, um, yeah, so this is the
kind of like, yes, there are timeless truths in
science, and then yes, there are big swaths of
science that we should be very cautious about.
Mhm. OK, great. So the book is again Heart
of Science, Philosophy of Scientific inquiry, and of course
I'm leaving a link with the description of the
interview. Uh, AND Doctor Steenge, would you like to,
uh, tell people where they can find you and
your work on the internet? I mean, I, I'm
asking you because in our first interview, it was
already 6 years ago, you have a, uh, an
Another affiliation. So that give us, give us an
updated version of where people can find you on
the internet. Oh
yeah, I mean, like my, my main website is
available um just by Googling my name and, um,
a lot of my, most of my published articles
are freely available on my website. So if viewers
want to just look at those articles they can,
they're just available on my website. The book is,
um. You know, actually it's a very cheaply priced
book for academic books. Um, IT'S, you know, many,
many monographs in philosophy of science are $100 150
dollars. This is, I think, 3030 $30 US dollars
or $25 US dollars, something like that. So that's
available just on Amazon or the University of Chicago
website. Um, YEAH, so that's, that's how they can
find the book, yeah, and, um, about me, and
so when we spoke last, I was at the
University of Cambridge, and I've moved recently to Singapore,
so I'm at the, as you mentioned in your
introduction. Uh, Nanyang Technological University in Singapore. Yeah.
OK, great. So thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show again. I
mean, it's, at least for me personally, this has
been a very fascinating conversation.
Thanks, Ricardo, really fun talking with you. Thanks for
having me on the show.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterry, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Danaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stinnik, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.